Everything we represent and stand for is
also applicable to content creator on
YouTube, on Twitch, on Instagram, even
on Fortnite and Roblox.
We're all struggling with the same
challenges of like discoverability,
engaging our audience, monetizing,
having access to financing, and then
being single or activity being
recognized in the broader physical world
as some legitimate activity from which
we can make a living.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoay.com and I'm
your host Dylan Grabowski.
In this episode, we're joined by
Sebastian Bourge, the co-founder of
Sandbox, a 3D Metverse game that
launched in 2012, and a global
ambassador for the Sand Chain L2.
In this conversation, we discussed how
CryptoKitties changed Sandbox's
trajectory from web 2 to web 3, how
products in every vertical need to adapt
to market needs, building through the
ups and downs, why the team is launching
the Sand Chain L2, how to build
effective partnerships, and so much
more.
Just a reminder, nothing said on this
podcast is a solicitation to buy or sell
any tokens and that the guest or host
might hold tokens discussed in any given
episode. You can check out a full
disclaimer at neonnew.com.
Also, if you enjoyed this episode,
please rate and review it on your
favorite podcasting platform and don't
be afraid to share with friends and
family. Every rating, review, like, and
comment really helps us reach more
people and bring you even more of your
favorite guests. With all that said, I
really enjoyed this conversation with
Sebastian, and I hope you enjoy the
conversation, too. What's up, everybody?
Welcome to the Smart Economy podcast.
Today, I'm psyched to be joined by
Sebastian Bourge, the co-founder of the
Sandbox and now Sand Chain Ambassador.
How you doing today, Seb? Amazing. Thank
you. Very excited to be here today.
>> Yeah, I'm excited to have you on. Um, I
think anybody who's been in the space
for quite a while will remember the the
kind of like epic run that Sandbox had
and just kind of how it was like a
prolific project during the NFT
metaverse days. But before we kind of
like dig into what was and and what's
next, um, as I was kind of like digging
into your background, I was looking in
on your website and I noticed that you
had listed all of these languages that
you've been studying, English, German,
Spanish, Chinese. So, um, why do you
think it's super important for people to
be able to speak more than one language?
Well, that's a great starter and I think
like it really
culture is global but like you don't
want to have like a globalized culture
in a way. So like the best way to
understand a lot of the nuance is to
start opening yourself and you open
yourself by starting with a language
like starting to understand the
expression the ethmology and being able
to to even if now probably with AI and
the new airports you can translate on
the fly and like we don't we it might
become effortless to learn the language
I think there is a lot of like um
richness in the language and subtilities
and accent it's quite even within the
same nation or country, you will have so
many different like accent of the same
language and expression that could vary
from the north to the south. It's quite
fun and that's also like you know um I
think it's a great icebreaker anywhere
you go as soon as you start saying the
first basic word like just show you care
for like the local culture people become
more receptive just more friendly out of
it and uh I find it cool and I think
it's just like it's worth expanding uh
your knowledge learning new things all
the time.
>> I love it. What's what's your favorite
language you're learning right now?
Hey. Um, as I spend more time in Korea
recently, I I started to learn a few
more funny words in Korean.
[laughter]
Awesome. Um, cool. So, yeah, I'm I
myself am embarking on the path of
learning a new language. I've been
studying Spanish pretty hardcore for um
a a good part of the second half of this
year. So, um it's a really enriching and
also humbling experience. So before we
kind of like dig into crypto, gaming,
web 3 and all that, you have a pretty
interesting background, a general
background in startups. So how did you
end up working in startups and then how
did that lead into your pre web 3 gaming
era?
>> Right. U well as far as I remember, I've
always been a geek. Like I always like
to adopt new technology, buy new things
on the first day to understand how they
work. And part of myself like like
[clears throat] I it's not just about
like discovering the new technology,
it's always like understanding but how
does it work and how do we make it more
accessible, palatable to more people,
attractive to more people. Um so as soon
as I got my first video game uh console,
I I wanted to make my own games one day.
As soon as I get my first computer, the
first thing I I wanted to do is like
disassemble software program to
understand like the logic behind it and
think through uh well like to make allow
them the program to do more thing than
they were usually intended to do. Um and
so like that led me to go into like an
engineering school in France in network
and telecommunication. As soon as like I
had the first cell phones, I wanted to
understand but how does cell phone work?
how can you communicate with other line
and from anywhere in the world uh and I
learned about GSM protocol in your GPS
edge and all the pre3G 4G 5G uh and 6G
now highspeed connections um and along
that journey I actually did an exchange
program uh in Hong Kong at the Chinese
university in Hong Kong in my last
semester out of which like not only I
discovered the local culture I traveled
around Asia and my co-founder Archer
Madrid approached me back in the day and
I we started working together remotely
which was quite unusual I would say back
in 2007 2008 to start like taking a
stranger call over Skype or some VIP
call with a card you scratch and say hey
I'm a French entrepreneur building a
startup in new technology peer-to-peer
using Berant and I'm interested in what
you've been doing because I've been an
open source developer in that field of
technology and would you like to work
together on a project? I say, "Yeah,
sure. Let's do that." And that was kind
of like the beginning of a great journey
that still goes on today. As as soon as
I finished that exchange program, I came
back to Paris. I hired me, did an
internship, graduated, got my diploma,
and like that was my first job in the as
COO of like that first startup. And
after a while, like we had first exit,
that company sold out to a CDN network
uh in Europe. We co-ounded another one
that this time was um one of the first
web two startups enabling users to
upload photo, video and music online in
the cloud and stream it from anywhere on
any device. Before it was called like
cloud streaming. Um before Netflix,
before Spotify. uh we sold that business
again and then in 2011 we start in
mobile gaming and we co-ounded one of
the first mobile free-to-play game
studio now like leading to one of my
childhood dream like yeah I want to make
video games and I want to have the
ability to make video games like the
startup guy in a garage like Bill Gates
when started or IBM stories you probably
heard of and and that was the right time
and what I figure out is like there's
always the right time to get started
Starting as an entrepreneur in the field
of new technology, of course, you're
going to take most of the risk and the
market might not be ready, but it's also
when the barrier to entry is usually the
lowest to new entrance and you can learn
the ropes and potentially establish
yourself as a long-term actor. And so
2011, uh, we co-ounded this mobile game
studio. We built games with characters
and IPs using strong uh franchise like
Garfield, Snoopy, Adam's Family and we
the first sandbox game back then a 2D
game on mobile where uh people could
just by the touch of their finger which
was really new with the iPhone and an
Android phone back then was not just
playing with a reactive with a stus on a
reactive screen which was super slow but
like with a finger things react super
fast, super smooth and you feel like you
could crate with a finger uh on the
iPhone screen and that was this this
feeling this magic of like I can make a
game and anyone else can make a game by
the touch of their finger that drove the
success the initial success of sandbox
uh we had over 40 million uh downloads
70 million player made creation by that
time uh we kind of were seen as like the
2D Minecraft had a lot of cool updates
people were making not just art but
games, music, electronics, STEM and uh
it also led me to um to think through
like great we have one of the most
successful user generated content game.
We've been in this field of user content
for quite some time now. But I can also
see that our top creator are actually um
um they're not staying after a few
months, after a few years like they were
like leaving the game and we that at
that moment we realized that in a way um
creators enjoy the passion of creating.
It's a good hobby for them but if they
were not able to make a revenue from it
like they would move on to the next
thing and no matter how hard we tried
and we tried but the technology failed
us at that time like literally to be
able to share some portion of revenue
with people who contributed in the
content. I had to find their name in the
game, match it with potentially a social
profile on Twitter if they had one, to
find if there's a way to DM them to get
to an email to then send them by email a
contract that I was writing. So then I
could send a PayPal payment to imagine a
number of step and all the effort and
hassle to be able to support the
creators who contribute to the game and
you only touch like a tiny slice of
them. Um so frustration came out of it
like and I didn't find a solution
basically to share revenue with our top
creators on mobile until um well until I
step in on virtual cats like the joke is
like cryptokitties is was one of the
first blockchain based game for those of
you who haven't been long enough in
crypto that was by itself not a
fantastic game like we've already see
like so many like uh games where You
take care of an animal, you breed them
and they evolve as you feed them and and
play with them. But there were three
innovation underneath that we found when
we benchmark and deconstructed the game.
The first one was the cat were actually
not bought from the developer itself but
from other players. The second was that
actually was not bought on the game
itself in a closed environment but you
had to go to this eBay of cats called
openc back then. So like a marketplace
external and it was not bought with a
credit card in US dollar or euro. It was
actually paid with if cryptocurrency and
at that moment I realized but that's
fantastic like instead of having virtual
cat or like virtual I don't know dogs or
dinosers or fishes or whatever like we
should just allow people to make their
own NFTts and then they can sell it
themselves on the marketplace and they
can get paid themselves without me in
the middle like I don't even need to
write a contract or figure what's their
PayPal or whatever. And so the
technology at that time in 2017 would
actually come as a real solution to the
problem we encountered. And [snorts]
that's at that moment that we say look
that's an opportunity we should be again
first mover let's rebuild sandbox let's
make it 3D p multiplatform have a
marketplace and use NFTs and tokens at
the core to to enable our credtors to
monetize and um uh so so that's not the
end of the journey then move forward
seven years later we've grown sandbox as
one of the largest um decentralized
virtual world people know us for
metaverse But ultimately we've also like
brought in over 8 million users into web
3. We partner with more than 400 major
brands from the like of like Gucci,
Snoop Dog, uh Jurassic World, Attack on
Titan, Ubisoft, Warner Music, many other
cool entertainment brand, not only
Western one, like a lot of Japanese,
Korean brand as well. So like the
multicultural aspect played an important
role in that success. And we're also
known for like being a leader in virtual
real estate and for sand the main token
of the platform which is um a top 100
cryptocurrency today still. I also think
that land has a lot of um name brand
power in the blockchain space
particularly for people who were here in
2020 2021. Um and you just brought up a
lot of really great things that I want
to um unpack. Um, CryptoKitties is also
the reason why I started exploring alt
L1s in 2017 and 2018, which ultimately
led to me working as a content creator
because of these Alt L1s. Um, so I'm
curious before we kind of like dig in
further, was the first time you kind of
heard about blockchain or crypto, was
your first exposure this moment when you
realized that there was a problem and
you couldn't reward your content
creators and now, holy crypto can
provide that solution or did you kind of
have an earlier exposure and an earlier
aha moment to to blockchain and crypto?
So I had an earlier exposure like I
started to find out about Bitcoin in
2016 early 17 and and like I was again
like a geek and engineer I say wow what
is this new thing I don't understand it
let me print and read the whole white
paper to make sure and then like but but
how is it mine like I don't understand
still like okay I need to buy a minor
and run a minor at home and like what
this thing a pool and end pool and then
I literally put my hands into it until I
fully understand the proof of work and
so and then at some point I got excited.
I say oh wow okay I want to do my own
mining facility. So I built a whole
business plan calculating the cost of
electricity into so many places around
the world cuz I say and then I I
realized I say hm that that's
interesting but that doesn't seem such a
a fun business because basically it's
just like hosting and power and running
racks and if you've been into the
collocation business data centers
business etc you know because that was
needed for storage for video and for we
hosting terabytes of content before on
the previous startup that we did and I
was in a CDN network. So I had already
had all that experience with data center
and self-hosting and before cloud
hosting and AWS really blew up uh on
that side too. And um and I thought like
well
maybe it can be something interesting
that not something that would I don't
see what's the dayto-day like after a
while. You set it up it runs requires
some maintenance.
um that's important choice to do and of
course like negotiating your supply of
energy and so on but I'm a builder at
her I do product for helping creators uh
I've done games that touch millions of
players
so I I felt like and then cryog came and
I said ah now there's a game that use
that technology interesting and that's
where like what we do in the gaming
industry usually when there's a game and
there's popular successful game we they
constructed. So we look at okay what are
all the steps of the user journey the
first time user experience the moment of
the payment pay walls and so on to
understand why they are successful and
people like playing and replaying those
games and uh that's where like the
deconstruction of cryptokitty and also
cryptogies interesting is one of the
reason why we joined forces and became
part of animoka brands they acquired our
game our mobile game studio in 2019.
Back in the day, Animoka Brands was just
um uh just there was they were bigger
companies than us obviously, but they
were a mobile game publisher. They were
taking like successful um game from the
west, US and so on to localize and
publish them on Asian market like China,
Korea, Hong Kong, Japan. basically not
just translating but localizing bringing
local IPs and characters to make them
attractive and based on like the the the
preference of local players and so we
were discussing a few years back around
like bringing sandbox to um to Asia
basically make it a successful Chinese
version and so on and then when we
talked again and they say oh we're now
the publisher of cryptogies in China and
say ah that's a interesting coincidence
because like we're literally moving into
NFTs thanks to CryptoKitties. And back
in July 2018, like Hong Kong hosted a
first conference called Nifty. That was
one of the first time like I guess very
first blockchain crypto conference
related to uh featuring gaming and um
uh many of like like companies like
OpenC, AXI Infinity and so on we made
early on at that time. Um and um yeah
and then we we felt like look like they
can bring us the distribution in Asia.
They can help us to understand those
market and we're literally aligned now
into like NFT the future for games. So
let's join forces together and that's uh
how like we we move along became
acquired by Animoka brands and afterward
like we saw like well the potential is
to really scale up sandbox into its own
success. So we spin it out, raise our
own, raise funds from external investors
and um and grew it as we've as we can
see today.
>> Yeah. I'm really curious. Was Cyber Park
a thing when you were studying in Hong
Kong?
>> Uh so in 2007 I don't recall I did my
point to answer Cyberport. I don't
recall going there and basically CK is
more in new territory. So I was more
around Shati in Monkok and then then
going down let's say I had a great young
student life like every Friday night
into Luong and Central and all of that
but I was not focused on business by
that time.
>> Right. So
>> LKF was more fun.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Cool. Yeah. Because um I was in
Cyberport in 2023 and Anamoka had a
pretty strong foothold there. Um, and it
seems like that is the where students
get funneled into this kind of corporate
park where there's a lot of web 3 and
other types of businesses and entities
that are located. And that was kind of
the first time I got exposure to Anamoka
brands. So maybe before we we jump into
how the relationship with Anamoka has
changed um I'm really curious to hear um
about the evolution of Sandbox. So you
said it started as this 2D game and and
now it's more than 12 years old. Uh 2018
you you see how NFTTS and how uh ERC20
tokens, fungeible tokens can be used to
empower creators and users of the game.
What was the thought process like in
2018 thinking, okay, we're going to go
full 3D. We're going to make this an
immersive world that people can be a
part of. Was that a difficult kind of
conversation to have or were you already
at an inflection point where you you and
your team were thinking we need to
upgrade the game and really bring it in
to the 2020s? So we we were more at that
inflection point because like what we
realized is like um a lot of like people
who started uh like playing video games
like they started in the '9s in the 2000
and there was like no more nostalgia for
2D pixel art game. There are people who
are grown up with 3D console right from
the start. So like there's no appeal to
2D game for them. Uh and so like the the
market for like retro style 8bit 16 bit
pixel arts game is like a shrinking
niche market whereas like uh well people
are just now accustomed to 3D casual
games. We had a lot of um what we saw as
well is like uh when we started sandbox
originally like we were Minecraft was
not on mobile but then after of course
Minecraft started to come to mobile. So
like we kind of lost a little bit like
the benefit of like being this 2D
Minecraft on mobile and we were also
missing one very important element um
like the multiplayer aspect like we
never succeeded to put sandbox 2D as a
multiplayer game. And so we thought like
like well it makes sense to multiplayer
game like the viral factor is way
greater because if you like a game
you're more likely to invite your
friends to play with you. So the user
the cost of user acquisition decrease if
you for every single user who enjoy the
game he invites three other friends to
play with him. So although the economics
made more sense and so uh we felt like
it was the right time to start a new
version of the game and to do it with
with at the core the integration of
blockchain NFTs and token allows us as
well to incorporate the uh economic part
where like uh we didn't have like an
inflated economy full of like virtual
currencies and uncapped supply of like
game items that we don't even have a a
proper tracking. of like how many we
sold and how many are in circulation
among all the devices and trackers um um
and users sorry and building it from
scratch. building not just a game but a
platform that comprise a 3D editor, a no
code game maker, a marketplace, a map
and the game client was interesting and
um we've did we've done so we built it
we launched around 20 the end of 2018
the first version of our vaual editor
the end of 2018 the first version of
game maker uh 2019 our first land sale
2020 the sun token
Uh and then from now from there on like
we had a lot of updates from the game
maker tool to increase possibilities to
enable more multiplayer gameplay, people
to make their own rules, better graphic,
better loading time and so on and like
the version that maybe maybe most people
played of Sandbox in the 202122
specifically if they entered with a boom
of NFTs and metaverse.
It's it's so different with what Sandbox
is today. um in term of fun in term of
like all the possibilities that the
metaverse give you in term of social
interaction and so on uh and so sometime
I wish like ah like of course it's six
it's four years later like of course but
how do we get them interested again to
come and check it out and so on so right
now we have this alpha season 6 um we've
been obviously it's like almost six year
once a year we run a season we feature a
lot of brands cool brands all together
for several weeks and people can explore
and progress through a battle pass to
earn different rewards. In this season
we have Susle, Smurf, Terminator,
Picking Blinder, Jurassic World, Kazio
G-Shock,
um, Black Mirror, Chupaces, lot of cool
brand to play and interact into their
universe. earn exclusive NFT reward and
even build your own games with this um
cool abilities for avatars, multiplayer,
player versus player, team versus team,
um game plays, persistency of your
progression. So, a lot of thing that the
coy also and the creditors ask us to add
over time.
>> I have a quick question. So, um, you
you've kind of used Minecraft as like
the competitor to what Sandbox is. And
for maybe like a millennial boomer like
myself who's never played Minecraft,
maybe somebody doesn't understand what
like this world is like and the the
world creation process and just being
able to explore a 3D world and build as
you go. So can you just like really high
level Eli 5 like the gameplay style of
the sandbox and what this kind of like
buildand go 3D world is what are the
ways in which people can play within it.
Yeah. So so one of the greatest
revolution of Minecraft was like uh you
build your own world into which you
evolve. So you go you collect resource
you craft them based on recipes. Um, and
so people could even host their own
servers to make their own rules. And
people started to spend nights, days,
and weekends to start rebuilding the
real world in Minecraft. A little bit
like a box of Legos, and people start to
make amazing things with them. So, we
had people who rebuilt the whole country
of Denmark all together on one server.
We had people that uh uh like recreated
like a giant library of Alexandria and
and great monument and landmarks of the
world and so on uh in Minecraft which by
itself became like a performance and
it's a collaborative performance you
like to create like you like to build um
and then the game play wasn't so
difficult. It was really essentially
building and putting blocks together,
but that required like the crafting time
and resource which is an an effort. Um,
and in sandbox as well like you could
play with the physical elements a lot of
physic or you can just build your own
levels and world and play into them or
share them into an online gallery for
other to discover, explore and rate. Uh
so very strong uh common element for
this category of game called like
sandbox games which is like a generic
category name where like basically the
game play is made by the players
themselves and the content is made by
the players themselves. But Minecraft
provided a level of freedom and an
extreme minimalism in the core the the
original gameplay of what it is down to
the essence of it which is like let's
build the world and let's explore and
play together. Uh, and so like a lot of
games started to copy Minecraft in the
graphic style and the aesthetic and they
added their own like hey I'm a like a a
blocky block because like the aspect of
like Minecraft a blockbased first person
shooter or I'm a blockbased like u I
don't know car racing game and so on and
so that's why you start to see a lot of
like copycats and clones that became
successful uh or or not actually some
actually shut down but the only that
remains still on Minecraft today. They
celebrated I think it's 15 anniversary
last year. Um and it it was a game that
like promoted as well a lot of like
positive value in education around and
was adopted early on by kids. Kids
enjoyed it as their like digital
playground to build together with their
friends. schools use Minecraft to teach
mathematic and science and physics and a
lot of other great
materials from the like the curriculum.
Um and and it became a tool of
expression as well and so it really
shaped a generation which are now used
to like more um to to basically
customize more their experience within
games. And for me that that kind of led
to like where I see the future of gaming
going which is like 100% user generated
content. I don't see a game where like
players cannot change the rules, cannot
change the character, cannot change the
world, cannot customize the items,
cannot sell themsel their creation in
the marketplace where there's not an
economy that can revolve around like the
contribution from the players as
creators. Um and and um
and and well now like I guess if you're
not familiar with Minecraft as a
generation, I guess Roblox is kind of
like what kind of took a little bit of a
Minecraft. It has more of like the
social network aspect as well, but
people can also learn coding and make
their own games on Roblox. Um I think
they just surpassed the 100 million plus
active daily users which like a
fantastic took them over 15 years as
well to reach that. So like definitely a
long
uh grind I would say until like they
surpassed Minecraft in number of players
and became the market leader now.
>> Mhm. Yeah. The my favorite block paced
blockbased game which recently lost its
developers was conquer strike. It was a
first player shooter that was clearly
built off of the open- source ethos of
block pace block- based um landscapes
and and 3D worlds. Um, so thank you for
kind of like delving into that history
and background of of how Minecraft and
and Roblox kind of made a foundation for
Sandbox to kind of launch in web 3. Um,
before you explained these basics, you
also brought up um a timeline and you
mentioned that you launched the LAN
token in in 2018. you launched the first
version of the game in in 2018 as well.
Um, and this was an era for people who
weren't around back then. That was a
very deep and dark bare market. And so,
you've had the experience of building in
the darkest of times, seeing this crazy
amount of support and use just three
years later. And now you're in a place
where you're you're asking the the class
of 2021, hey, come back and test the
game. This is completely different than
what you remember. So, I guess maybe
what are some of the lessons that you've
you've learned or that you've gleaned
from launching a product in 2018 when
the appetite for probably buying a new
NFT might not have been there. Um, to
going to a place where like this was a
$6.8 8 billion market cap project that
was part of like the blue chips of
gaming. And I remember everybody talking
about having gaming tokens in their
portfolios. Um, and now being in a place
where you're like, hey, we have all
these great brands and we have a
different type of game, but our user
base isn't the same as it was in 2018 or
2021. What are just like some of the
lessons that you you've gleaned over the
years? because I think a lot of people
are going to be in your position in 2 3
5 6 years where they're going to have
gone through these crazy waves of um
support and users and then grinding
through bare markets,
>> right? Well, one of the first lessons is
like basically even if we are building
like a user generated content
creation tool or or game like we were
not
like we didn't launch it without content
and we didn't launch it in a way like
hey okay this is a great tool for you to
start creating you know what let's start
like basically we had those soft launch
period where we understood like who's
going to be our uh original like uh core
audience. In the case of like the mobile
game uh when we did the soft launch in
2012, we worked with over 100 pixel
artists which are like people whose job
is to make 2D pixel art for various
purpose like graphic magazines and so
on. and we contact them and say look
we're making one of the first pixel art
game like we want you to use it to and
we'll pay you 10 or $20 for every
drawing you'll do and you'll share and
we did that until we had a thousand
content uh available on the marketplace
made by the most talented pixel artists
in the world who were excited to test a
new tool get paid for it and like for us
collect a lot of feedback to improve the
product as well as when we launch have
something fantastic to showcase for
inspiring ing orders and we applied the
same recipe in 2018.
We had this 3D editor, the Vox edit. Uh
there was already a market leader tool
called Magika Vauil that a lot of people
were using to do Vauel art. They were
sharing every day over social media with
a hashtag called Vauil dailies their
creation. So they like to really
showcase and network and be part of the
community because of that. And we
approached them and said, "Look, we're
making a tool that allows you to do
vaualor, but also to animate it." And
that's the exciting feature that's
different from Magika Vauel. We all love
you to try, we'll pay you 30, $40 back
then uh per model like it takes you one
hour, two hour maybe to do, you could do
x00 for us. We'll showcase it obviously.
And we love your feedback. and you know
by by the way we pay you and you keep
all the ownership of your creation and
you have the right to sell it on the
marketplace when we launch it. And so
that was a great strategy and like a lot
of Volksw artist one thing that's
terrible in the game industry is like
the most creative people the artists are
actually the underpaid the most
underpaid people of like like the whole
industry. So they're always that's why
like most of the time like creative
artist they're always like trying to do
multiple job multiple gigs looking for
side revenue that they could earn from
their skills and so they they had a
great appetite for that and that's how
like many of the first um content
creator on Sandbox came in early they
made Vauo and then they love the idea of
making their own games without having to
talk to a developer and so on using
their content.
uh and that allows us to showcase a tool
in action with a lot of great content
already. And then to accelerate that, we
also introduce a first like creator fund
back then. I think once we had raised
funds with $1 million to attract even
more people to use our game maker tool
and um at Vox edit and keep showing and
and there's something that's very um
that's true like basically you
um when you arrive to a tool or
marketplace and you see great content it
keep inspiring and that's more of mouth.
So there is kind of like snowball effect
of like if you showcase one category of
things with your creation tool, it will
attract more and more of that category.
And so the fact that we picked ourself
initially like creators as a core
audience helped us to attract more
creators. And because creators saw like
oh I heard from other creator that they
are getting paid that is cool software
and like I can sell my content on the
marketplace. It was really a positive
feedback loop and credit to and position
us among the first and then um when we
introduce a concept of lands people also
like virtual artists they have
familiarity with Minecraft many of them
were actually doing things in Minecraft
because of again like they were all
playing with blocks right so they they
enjoyed the idea of I can make my own
game now and uh I need a lands that they
start to get interested into lands so
when When we did the first land sale,
they they sold out entirely in a few
minutes or half an hour back in the day.
That was exciting. And we didn't even
have our token. It was not listed. But
it proved that we have user for our
tools. We had users and demand for the
NFT we were selling because the right
value proposition and match. And it
proved that uh then we could go and talk
to the exchanges and instead of being in
a situation where like well exchange are
big and they have all the leverage say
look we have a fantastic and engaged
community who's already spending who
spent literally hundred to thousand of
dollars and time participating and they
are ready to join for the first time a
crypto exchange if you list us and that
actually inverted the balance and make
it more interesting and allow us to
releas um on the Binance launchpad in
2000 August 2020
um and then afterwards on two more
exchanges and so I think it's not about
chasing the big number the big community
over Twitter over uh Telegram. I don't
think we've we've been that great at
like always like the community and the
hype, but we've been better at
delivering like real experience, real
product and focusing on like the core
audience that enjoy
um by playing around with what we
launched.
>> Very cool. Um, at the risk of maybe
opening a can of worms, do you have any
insights into the retention of users
that that bought those first land NFTts
and how many of them are still here
today? Is it like 5%? Is it 30%? How
many like hardcore sandbox users have
you been able to keep playing on a
day-to-day or week- toeek basis since
you guys rebranded into the web 3 realm?
>> Oh wow. So that's that one has been a
pretty challenging I would say like as
soon as we moved from uh mobile to PC
first of all for even not taking into
account the web 3 part we knew that well
we already addressing different
potentially different audience. So the
fact that we move from a 2D mobile game
to a 3D PCbased and then PC and Mac
based version that was a gap. The second
thing is like um now
so so it was difficult to conver convert
even though we had 40 million installs
like we never promise we'll bring 40
million users to the PC version but we
knew that that was unrealistic.
The second thing is um many of the land
owners we found they are the most
engaged uh participant into our
ecosystem. uh they are creating they are
playing and we are still seeing that
today like we have launched the alpha
season 6 and among the the players of
the alpha season 6 I've seen like a good
percentage of them are actually like
land owners so that made me um very
happy and I understand like why like
they are in looking for inspiration for
their own land they also potentially
want to earn some of their rewards to
And because they have also like they
built something on their own land, it
creates an additional attachment to the
platform. Like the personal commitment
you put into it is even higher.
Uh people who just who never played or
never built but maybe they got the
token. We we we also have that audience
obviously. Um and and we had more of
that audience when like there was more
hype in the market, people who were
buying NFT more for the speculative
aspect than necessarily for the interest
in those games. Uh but souls tend to
come and go over time or or if they're
still holders like they're not active
users, right?
Um,
>> I'm curious. Do you I work in in an
ecosystem that I work in the NEO
ecosystem and that was like the darling
coin of 2017 and 18. And now today for a
lot of long-term ecosystem participants
um because the price is down and you
know when when token price is down
everybody's at fault. There's a lot of
negativity and a lot of negative
sentiment. Do you find that you are
running into this issue as well with
long-term participants or because a lot
of your land holders are also creators
that maybe they don't necessarily pay
too much attention to the price, they're
still enjoying the process of building
and creating and participating. I guess
are you do you have a lot of like
negative sentiment that you run into on
a day-to-day basis or does the
positivity of creation and creativity
outweigh that?
>> Well, it's I I wish it was as magical as
that. Yes, [laughter] we we do have very
very good genuine passion, creative
people, Sanfam members. Some of them
came again when we announced Sunshine in
October 1st in Singapore. So I've been
really happy to meet and see people
who've been with us for four or five
years sometimes more. Um but I also
understand like the price and the price
sentiment create a negative sentiment.
It's hard to fight against certain wave
and misconception. So when start the
narrative started to be around like
metaverse is dead and like there's no
players in in those virtual worlds or
like the price of the token itself moved
from $17 to $1 and at 0.3 0.2 today. Uh
I wouldn't call it depressing but I
would call like it's um it's difficult
you know and that affect the mo
everybody's motivation the motivation of
your team members who probably wereum
when you use a token as well as an
incentive to reward for participation in
the network or the project.
uh by you certain
just like creators like the financial
aspect is an essential part of your
motivation you cannot just remove it
from it so so I understand that it's
difficult I understand that some people
figure out that like they could have
better things to do of their time or it
was not just worth the economical
equation wasn't worth like going on in
that ecosystem anymore
Um
where is more difficult is like when a
lot of the project from the 2020 21 are
no longer here they are no longer
building you don't meet the founders
still there um you don't feel like
there's
and
it it is challenging it is difficult the
market will go up and down like it's
always easier to surf the top of the
wave and see we are the best of the
world where like everything is easy.
It's much harder to say we're still here
and building when everything is hard.
But I do think like commitment pays off.
And I hear a lot of people that say,
"But why are you still still here and
building? You could have retired 10
times if you wanted." And said, "No, no,
like I don't think I achieve the
mission. Like we still have a lot to
build. Um like my my goal is like not
just
yeah I want million of people to be
creator and to make a living from being
content creator on sandbox and outside
and so I'm uh um I feel like we have a
lot more solution to offer um and that
it's um every major
disruption and I was mentioning even
before it took 15 years to Roblox to
become the leader
They will not be done in two or three
years. They will be done in more likely
10 years, sometimes more. Um
there's never like overnight success.
Even if sometimes the narrative
will would like to make you think so
like it's easy and it can be overnight
and so on. But no, like so far no
success came overnight. Um it's always
been like it's a overnight success with
10 years in the making and some
iteration and some failures and steps in
the middle. And I believe like I we have
a unique opportunity with Sandbox that
even if I started something from scratch
like would take me again 10 years to
rebuild such a strong brand a strong
potential project a token that's a top
100 listed globally recognized known um
and such a fantastic community and so I
prefer definely to keep building and
adding value So that's why like I'm sure
we'll talk about Sunshine like um the
next phase for Sandbox is to not is to
start
empowering creators in different ways
and just like making them build virtual
world experiences because I think like
all the experience we accumulated and
everything we represent and stand for is
also applicable to content creator on
YouTube, on Twitch, on Instagram, even
on Fortnite and Roblox. They we're all
struggling with the same challenges of
like discoverability,
engaging our audience, monetizing,
having access to financing and then
being seeing our activity being
recognized in the broader physical world
as some legitimate activity from which
we can make a living.
I think a lot of people who've been
building in web 3 for as long as you
have um have experienced the kind of
pitfalls and the negativity that comes
with the waves of sentiment. So I know
for a fact that many many other people
are in your shoes and share similar
positions, but I 100% agree that taking
the long-term vision and continuing to
build day in and day out regardless of
if you're at the top of the wave or at
the bottom is clearly the way forward.
And so I'm excited to talk about what
the Sandbox ecosystems next step is with
um Sand Chain. And really what's super
exciting and interesting is that
Sandchain is an L2. And the Sandbox felt
that in order to be able to create to
feed this creator economy that Sandchain
was the way to do it. And I love this
quote that was that was that you had in
decrypt which said the real value no
longer lies in the base infrastructure
which is increasingly commoditized but
in how we differentiate whom we serve
and how we enable meaningful use cases.
So now I'd like to talk a little bit
about Sandhain.
Why is it why is now the time to move
off of Ethereum and to not leverage
Ethereum as kind of like the pushing
force for Sandbox? What was like the
moment that you and your team said now's
the time we build Sand Chain?
>> Well, you you just like you said like I
think like Ethereum is a fantastic
general purpose layer one chain. it's
here to stay and like become like really
the the layer for all the side chains.
But like the network you're building on
needs to support your growth and we say
like in web 3 like network effects are
very important like that's how like you
bootstrap community and you build. But
the realization we had is like well uh
we we work very hard to bring new users
to web 3. Those users they entered
Polygon and Ethereum as a chain. But
what did really Polygon or Ephum did for
us? Like when did they go out there and
promote actively Sandbox among all the
other project
and for them it didn't really matter if
we were like the number one uh revenue
source sometimes on some days for like
having the most popular NFT collection
of land or avatar being minted on their
chains because they look under a
different perspective. And so that
really led us to think like well like
first the user experience is not great
because they have to buy a second token
and we have to explain them what is this
chain that they need to buy a token
from. then like um it the the chain
itself could be slow and even polygon at
some time was really under heavy load
and like that affected the per our own
performance
and ultimately like even though we they
didn't do nothing obviously like the
efforts were overall limited into like
how they could support our activity
specifically and sometimes the chain
doesn't have like gamers per se or
creators so like even if they bring user
they will not necessarily bring bring
the right kind of user. So we went there
and we back to the drawing board and
like we thought okay like how to best
support our custom well we need to have
our own side chain and a side chain that
support our own token and the fact that
if we bring users um well those users
can flow within that ecosystem. And so
the first thing we looked from a side
chain perspective was like that sand
token will become the gas token for the
chain. Then that already restricted the
parimeter of like which side chain we
could work on. And then we look at which
side chain was actually already live in
production battle tested because we
cannot wait for it to go to test net
maybe eventually and be delayed one more
year. Um, and so, um, that's something I
wanted to, um, but after a few months of
looking into like ZKYNC really came out
as like the main, uh, partner of choice
to build the Sunshine with a high
transaction speed, the support for our
own token as a gas fee, and uh, many
other benefits such as like having a
roll up as a service providers, which
uh, in this case, Caldera which allows
us to actually abstract the complexity
of building the infrastructure so we can
focus more on like let's leverage our
ecosystem and build something and bring
the content and the audience instead. So
that's what we did. Uh we had a lot of
uh interest obviously since we launched
the sunshine. I think today we have more
than 100,000 signature already of our
manifesto. The test net went live last
week. Uh we have some quests ongoing
where people can start earning their own
send points.
Um and um I'm really excited to try to
build a solution that focus on the
content creator. When we looked at the
space of side chain, we didn't see a lot
that focus in that vertical. We see a
lot of gaming chain obviously and and I
felt like we're not a gaming chain. We
we've been really if you look at the
whole history of sandbox it's all been
and always been about the creators. If
they could create a 3D world game for
the first time, that's fantastic. That's
a great on boarding for many people like
me. In my teenage days, I always wanted
to make my own game. But we shouldn't
also like restrict them into like, hey,
the only way for you to be a content
creator is to make a 3D virtual world
based game or to be on sand for a brand
to be on sandbox is to open an
experience on the map. There is many
ways at Sandbox with our strong brand,
our partnership and our tokens and
community we could help you and before
we our approach actually also restrain
us to many ways we could partner with
brand whereas with what the the value
proposition for chain is like loyalty as
value every interaction being on chain
having loyalty points on chain that can
be swapped for sand point or credit
points and eventually for and or
launching your own creator token. I do
think that it's enabling a whole new
layer for content creator to monetize,
to engage, to grow their audience. And
that's where I'm excited about because
it comes not as a replacement. It comes
as an expansion of what people were able
to do before in Sandbox, but it's not
restricted only to Sandbox. It's
appealing to a much larger audience.
>> Yeah. And congratulations on TestNet. Um
the the latest stat that I looked at was
more than 25k addresses that
participated and more than 138k
transactions um in less than a month.
That's fantastic. There's there's
clearly a a market hunger there. Um, as
we kind of like zoom out and and start
to wrap up, I think one of the super
impressive feats other than just
surviving in blockchain for eight plus
years, um, are the the caliber and the
magnitude of the partnerships that
Sandbox has been able to establish. So
can you just share some nuggets of gold
for how web 3 builders projects can go
out there and really make the most of
themselves and establish these
relationships? What are some key ways in
which you can build effective
partnerships?
Well, like at the core, you have to
think like always when we try to
approach a partnership and I I I saw a
lot of those
and like let's just announce something
without a real ground behind and I I
kind of like force myself and sandbox
like let's not do that like because
basically
like what are we announcing exactly?
What is a product? Keep in mind I'm an
engineer by background. I'm a product
guy. uh build products. I want to know
like exactly what's out of like what's
just been announced. So you the way we
approach partnership is we try to
understand first like what can we bring
ourself as a solution to the partner and
then like okay and so what like that's
the number one question after you should
read something you ask yourself so what
like did I understood what they meant uh
do I understand where to click and what
can I do and so if you fail that test to
the simple question is like so what like
then it's not meaningful and shouldn't
happen but If you understand like what
is a value ad like what people will feel
and see as a journey as they click into
a link go to a page or download an app
and get into a product and get for
benefit then it should happen.
So as we grow beyond as as Sandchain
launches and we grow beyond just simply
looking at it as an L2 for gaming
ecosystem
really wants to support the creator
economy. What are some of the broader
initiatives that you and your team are
going to be pushing? Who are the
different types of builders and creators
you want to see coming onto the chain
and building within the ecosystem?
So ideally we wish to be a place that
gathers and aggregate a lot of like
creator focused solution whether is
related to like launchpads decks uh IP
monetization IP tokenization royalties
uh we don't intend to rebuild all of
those by ourself and become a competitor
with other I prefer like if there's
other solution out there on other chain
even on bay on like why don't just add
sunshine to your multi-chain strategy
and like let's make let's be the place
where content creator if we attract and
we appeal to them going back to this
idea the more creators you have in one
place the more it appeals to more
creators as well um that we can offer
and gather all our solutions. So some of
the value proposition for sunshine is to
build loyalty program um with quest and
action. We also wanted to enable like uh
crypto payment for content creator as in
advance over over future recoupable that
they would receive by a wire transfer
from Google ads, YouTube and so on. And
then we found oh there's already
solution out there people who tried to
build it. So instead of like competing
with them, let's partner with them and
let's help them to grow with sunshine.
So maybe they can help more creators.
And that's also one way I look at it is
like I I always believe in web 3 that
the market is still too small for us to
compete. So we should have on the
opposite like think like how we grow the
market for all of us by supporting each
other, speaking together, inviting other
people who are trying to do kind of like
the same thing or or address the same
problem
uh to present and and and
that mindset led me as well to become
the president of the blockchain game
alliance and support blockchain gaming u
explaining the benefit of blockchain
technology within the broader video game
industry to support the whole blockchain
gaming industry.
uh that led me to have as OBI like a
digital art gallery in Paris and support
artists and digital artists and be all
the actors into that ecosystem
and uh here like my approach is like
again any solution that's focused on
helping content creator like we should
join forces we should um see how we like
we can bring more value and more
creators
from the part and I'm not here to try to
um say oh you know what we'll build
everything ourself and we'll be the
leader for a content creator it's it's
always going to be a fragmented market
you were into the NEO ecosystem back in
the day now like there's so many
different blockchains out there um we're
not trying to be a killer L1 of whatever
no we are like a very simple and
friendly side chain L2 that wants to
help and and I hope that with this
mentality and like with the network that
we have of brands of investors of
partners we'll be able to be attractive
and efficient as a solution to solve
that problem
>> and for anyone who hasn't yet done so um
I take I I suggest taking a peek into
the blockchain gaming alliance game
alliance and also take a peek into
artverse they're game gaming and art are
two very great use cases is for NFTTS
and I think they're phenomenal um
verticals to delve into. So I guess Seb
last question wrapping up everybody on
crypto Twitter's favorite question when
mainnet uh I'm being a little cheeky. Um
what are what are kind of like the next
steps for for Sanchain?
>> Yes, good question. Um so we just rolled
out the test net uh the builder kit with
our partner sequence which offering like
a very uh seamless solution to onboard
users with account abstraction and many
other feature just went live as well. So
you can go to build.sson.com
sunshine.com
uh to get started there like we're
starting already to see a lot of first
integration happening uh test net we're
jering toward Q1 2026
um we'll open it as early as we can as
we hopefully see people like bring um um
by we have sufficient like volume of
transaction for testing users and like
we feel like okay now let's push a big
button there's no way back. That's main
net and uh and we'll have more like
we'll have probably launchpads introduce
decks and a lot of other uh great
products. So, and we'll launch various
initiative to attract those builders as
well. Um yeah, that's an exciting road
map for the next coming weeks and
months.
>> Awesome. Well, best of luck on the
forthcoming mainet launch. Um, and for
anyone who's interested in building in
Sand Chain, um, you've you just heard
the link to go to. I hope to run into
you in Buenosidis for Dev Connect. So,
I'll be keeping my ears to the ground
for events that you're speaking at or
that you're hosting. And I want to thank
you so much for taking the time to join
the Smart Economy podcast today.
>> Thank you. And well, see you on
Sunshine. Cheers. Thank you for tuning
in to the Smart Economy podcast. To stay
in the loop with all of our latest
episodes and insights, head over to
www.smarteconomyodcast.com.
And don't forget to subscribe to our
YouTube channel for all of our video
content. If you enjoyed this discussion,
please consider showing your support by
liking, commenting, and reviewing this
episode on your favorite podcasting
platform. Your feedback helps us reach
more listeners and bring even better
content your way. We'd also love to hear
from you. So, please drop a comment on
Spotify or YouTube to share what topics
you'd like us to cover or who you'd like
to see as our next guest. And if you or
someone you know might make for a great
guest, please don't hesitate to reach
out. We're always on the hunt for fresh
voices and new perspectives.
And for our NEO token holders out there,
please consider voting for NEON News
Today as your council representative.
We've proudly been serving the NEO
ecosystem since 2017, and we'll continue
to do so by putting portions of our
council rewards directly back into
ecosystem growth initiatives. With all
of that said, we cannot wait to catch
you next time.